WINDOWS DEFENDER 

AIM: To Prevent PC against latest threats using Windows Defender. 

DESCRIPTION : Microsoft Defender for Endpoint (formerly Windows Defender Advanced Threat 
Protection) is a post-breach security solution that helps detect, investigate, and respond to threats 
within a network. Unlike traditional antivirus software, it complements antivirus tools by focusing on 
post-attack analysis and remediation. It continuously monitors endpoints to identify vulnerabilities, 
provides exposure scores, and recommends fixes. Through attack surface reduction, it limits potential 
entry points for cyberattacks by restricting untrusted applications, websites, and files. Using 
Microsoft’s advanced machine learning and cloud-based protection, it offers next-generation defense 
against emerging threats. Its endpoint detection and response (EDR) features deliver real-time alerts, 
detailed investigations, and guided remediation steps, all accessible through a centralized dashboard 
for effective threat management. 

PROCEDURE :  

1. Open Windows Security from Start menu 

2. Go to Virus and threat protection and use quick scan 

3. To enable protection, click on manage settings and turn on real-time protection 

4. Enable Cloud - delivered protection and click on check for updates to check for updates 

5. Enable automatic sample submission for advanced threat detection 

6. Run a full scan 

7. Take required actions on threats, if any have occurred 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



NMAP AIM : To familiarize network discovery and security auditing using Nmap 

DESCRIPTION : Nmap (Network Mapper) is a free, open-source tool used for network discovery and 
vulnerability scanning. It helps network administrators identify live hosts, open ports, running 
services, operating systems, and potential security risks by sending specially crafted IP packets and 
analyzing their responses. The results include detailed information such as port numbers, protocols, 
service names, and their states (open, closed, filtered, or unfiltered). Key features of Nmap include 
Host Discovery (identifying active devices on a network), Port Scanning (finding open ports on target 
hosts), Version Detection (determining the application name and version running on network 
services), and OS Detection (identifying the operating system and hardware details). As an active 
information-gathering tool, Nmap performs several scanning steps—finding live machines, 
discovering open ports, scanning beyond intrusion detection systems (IDS), and identifying 
vulnerabilities—to locate exploitable communication channels and strengthen network security. 

PROCEDURE:  Open the Terminal in Kali Linux OS and type nmap. 

STEP 1: FIND LIVE MACHINES , Ping Sweep/Scan (-sP) is used to find live machines from a range of IP 
addresses. It sends ICMP echo request to multiple machines.                                                     
Command: nmap –Sp<targetip> 

STEP 2: DISCOVER OPEN PORTS, In computer networking, a port is a communication endpoint. 
Command: nmap –p<port> -v<target> 

a)TCP Connect Scan [-sT]                                                                                                                    
Introduction: TCP Connect scan detects open ports by three way handshake. It is also referred as 
FULL OPEN Scan.                     Command: nmap -sT <target>      For example: nmap -sT 172.16.4.51 

b) SYN Stealth Scan [-sS]                                                                                                                        
Introduction: It is based upon TCP handshake. It is also referred as HALF OPEN Scan. In this type of 
scan, Nmap sends SYN packet: 

 If port is open - it responds with ACK. 

 If port is closed - it responds with RST. 

 If port is filtered - it simply drops SYN packet. 

Command: nmap -sS -A -O <target> -p <port> (where -A is Aggressive scan, -O is operating system) 

c) UDP Scan [-sU]                                                                                                                                        
Introduction: This type of scan is used to scan UDP ports. Nmap sends the 0 byte UDP packets. If 
source receives an ICMP Port Unreachable message, then the Port is closed. 

 

STEP 3: SCANNING BEYOND FIREWALL, : Nmap provides feature to control time options– [-T]. The 
timings are: Paranoid [-T0], Sneaky [-T1], Polite [-T2], Normal [-T3], Aggressive [-T4], and Insane [-T5]. 
Command: nmap -T[0-5] [target] 

STEP 4: IDENTIFY VULNERABILITIES,  After finding the open ports and services running on it, this step 
identifies the vulnerabilities associated with the open ports.                                                         
Command: nmap -p 445 --script=smb-vuln*<target> 



STEGANOGRAPHIC TOOLS , AIM :To hide the secret data from unauthorized users in order to prevent 
confidentiality,integrity and availability of data. 

STEGHIDE ,  

DESCRIPTION Steghide is a free steganography program that allows you to hide secret files inside 
other files. Steganography means concealing information within something else. Steghide works 
by embedding your hidden data within an audio, image, or video file. To anyone else, this carrier 
file will look and sound normal. But it secretly contains your encrypted message or file. The 
Steghide tool lets you easily embed your hidden information and extract it again with a 
password. This provides a way to securely transmit messages or sensitive data over public 
networks or any system where privacy is needed. 

PROCEDURE: 

a. Installation & Usage To use Steghide, you first need to install it in Kali Linux. You can do this 
easily by typing the following command :  

       Command : sudo apt-get install steghide 

 Steghide is controlled completely through the terminal command line interface in Kali Linux. 
To start using it, simply open a terminal window and type :                                                  
Command : steghide 

 Create a text file called " secret.txt " and add some simple secret message text to it. Save it in 
your working directory. Also place the image file you want to use to hide the data, like " 
gfg.jpg ", in the same folder. Open a terminal window and use the " steghide embed " 
command to embed " secret.txt " into " gfg.jpg ". 
Command : steghide embed -ef Secret.txt -ef gfg.jpg 
 
 
It will ask you to create a password. Choose a strong password and enter it. This will be 
needed to extract the hidden data later. Steghide will embed "secret.txt" inside 
"kevinmitnick.jpg" using the password encryption  . 
 
Now the image file contains the secret data entirely hidden within it. You can safely share or 
store the image file like normal. When ready, use the following below command with the 
password to retrieve the embedded "Secret.txt" file. 
Command: steghide extract -sf gfg.jpeg cat Secret.txt 
 
You can also have Steghide show info about any files with embedded data. The below 
command will verify if a file has hidden content inside it: 
Command: steghide info gfg.jpg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 



B. STEGOSUITE 

DESCRIPTION StegoSuite is another free steganography program included in Kali Linux. It 
offers several steganography techniques in one toolkit. StegoSuite lets you hide information 
within images and audio files, just like Steghide. But it also includes additional steganography 
methods like hiding data in video files, OpenOffice documents, HTML web pages, and PDF 
files. The goal of StegoSuite is to provide an all-in-one steganography tool with many 
different hiding techniques. This gives users more options to conceal messages or files. Like 
Steghide, StegoSuite aims to securely embed secret data so it can't be detected by others. 
The carrier files look harmless, but they secretly hold encrypted messages.StegoSuite 
provides an easy-to-use interface and wizard for beginner users to start applying 
steganography. With both Steghide and StegoSuite, Kali Linux is well-equipped for basic 
steganography tasks. 
PROCEDURE: 
a. Installation & Usage StegoSuite is another free steganography tool included in Kali Linux. 

The main difference from Steghide is that StegoSuite provides a graphical interface, 
making it more user-friendly. To install StegoSuite, open a terminal and type : 
 Command : sudo apt-get install stegosuite 
 
Once you have installed the StegoSuite package in Kali Linux, you can easily start using 
the program. Now you just need to type the following command to Launch the 
StegoSuite Tool. 
Command: stegosuite gui 
 
After that Click the " Browse Files " button and select the image you want to use to hide 
the text. 
 
After Selecting the Image file Enter the secret text Message or Just Drag and Drop the " 
Secret.txt " file. Then Set the Password to Encrypt the Image file and Click on Embed. 
Follow the Steps as Shown in the Below GIF file. 
 
After that you will see this New file created on the Desktop name " gfg_embed.png " 
this file include our hidden file in it. 
 
Now the image file contains the secret data entirely hidden within it You can safely share 
or store the image file like normal. Whenever you want to see the Hidden Text file just 
use " stegosuite gui " Command and Select the New File that created onto our Desktop 
and Just type the Password and hit the Extract Button. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 



 

WIRESHARK 
AIM: To provide deeper understanding of Network Protocol Analysis using Wireshark 
DESCRIPTION :Wireshark is a free, open-source packet analyzer (a “sniffer” or network 
protocol analyzer) used for education, protocol development, network troubleshooting, 
and security analysis. It captures and inspects network traffic—putting the network 
interface into promiscuous mode to collect packets—and lets users filter and analyze 
communications between devices to troubleshoot latency, dropped packets, or 
malicious activity. Similar to tcpdump but with a graphical interface and richer 
filtering/sorting, Wireshark helps network and security engineers observe traffic flows, 
identify problems, and investigate attacks. Because switches may not forward all traffic 
to a single port, extended capture techniques such as network taps or port mirroring 
(sending copies of packets from one port to another) are often used to view traffic 
across a network. 
Features of Wireshark:  It is a standard three-pane packet browser. 
                                            It performs deep inspection of the hundreds of protocols. 
                                           It is also useful in VoIP analysis. 

1. Opening Wireshark: 
 Launch the Wireshark application on the system 

2. Selecting an Interface 
 From the Wireshark interface, select the NIC (Network Interface Card) where packets 

are deployed 
2. Observing Captured Packet 

 Note down the different types of packets shown in the Capture window 
 Some packets may be highlighted in different colours 
 Take screenshots of packets with different colours for reference 

3. Capture and Stop options: 
 Explore the Capture menu and note the available options 
 Use the Stop Capture icon to end the capture process 

4. Modifying Colouring rules: 
 Go to Edit  Preferences  Appearance  Colouring Rules 
 Explore or change the default colouring rules to customize how different packets are 

displayed 
5. Viewing I/O Graphs: 

 Navigate to Statistics  I/O Graphs to view the graphical representation of captured 
traffic 

Exp: i) Filter: ip.addr == 192.168.1.6 * This will filter only display packets where the IP 
address 192.168.1.6 appears where the source or the destination. 
The IP address 192.168.1.6 appears where the source or the destination. 
ii) Filter: ip.addr == 192.168.1.6 && ssdp * This filter will show only SSDP packets where 
the source or destination is 192.168.1.6 
iii) Filter: ip.addr == 192.168.1.6 && !mdns * This filter will display all packets 
involving 192.168.1.6 except mDNS packets 
iv) Filter: ip.addr == 192.168.1.6 or udp * This filter will display all packets 
involving 192.168.1.6 plus all UDP packets from anywhere 

6. Saving/Documenting Results: 
 Save the Capture file if needed for further analysis 



 
HTTRACK 
 AIM: To familiarize the cyber forensic tool httrack  
DESCRIPTION: HTTrack is an easy-to-use offline browser utility. It allows you to 
download a World Wide Website from the Internet to a local directory, building 
recursively all directories, getting html, images, and other files from the server to your 
computer. HTTrack arranges the original site's relative link-structure. Simply open a page 
of the "mirrored" website in your browser, and you can browse the site from link to link, 
as if you were viewing it online. HTTrack can also update an existing mirrored site, and 
resume interrupted downloads. HTTrack is fully configurable, and has an integrated help 
system. WinHTTrack (Windows release of HTTrack) and WebHTTrack (Linux/Unix release 
of HTTrack) are very similar, but not exactly identical. You may encounter minor 
differences (in the display, or in various options) between these two releases. The 
engine behind these two release is identical. 
 
Procedure: 

1. Open HTTrack Website Copier 
o Launch the HTTrack app from the system. 

2. Create a New Project 
o Click on Next 
o Enter the Project Name 
o Optionally, enter a Category and select the base path. 
o Click Next 

3. Enter Website URL 
o In the web address field, type / paste the desired website address. 
o If required, multiple URLs can be added. 
o For normal use, leave defaults. 
o Click Next 

4. Set Preferences (optional) 
o You can adjust settings such as download limits, filters, or proxy if needed. 
o For normal use, leave defaults. 
o Click Next 

5. Start Mirroring 
o Click Finish to begin the Website Copying. 
o HTTrack will start downloading and will show progress. 

6. View the Mirrored Website 
o Once completed, HTTrack will provide an option to browse the mirrored website. 
o This opens a duplicate local version of the site in your browser. 

7. Close / Exit 
o After verification, close the application. 

 

 

 

 

 



WPScan   AIM: To learn how to use WPScan to identify security vulnerabilities, enumerable users, 
and check for weak components (themes and plugins) in a target WordPress installation. 

DESCRIPTION: WordPress is one of the most popular content management systems (CMS) on the 
internet. With its extensive plugin ecosystem and user-friendly interface, it powers a significant 
portion of websites across the globe. However, like any software, WordPress is not immune to 
security vulnerabilities. WPScan is a widely used WordPress vulnerability scanner. It’s designed to 
help security professionals, developers, and website administrators identify security weaknesses in 
WordPress installations. WPScan leverages a database of known vulnerabilities, enumerates installed 
plugins and themes, and checks for misconfigurations. By regularly scanning your WordPress 
website, you can stay one step ahead of potential attackers and maintain a secure online presence. 

Procedure: 

How to use WPScan: 

Note: For practical use in a lab, always target a legal, controlled environment.  

1. Update the WPScan Vulnerability Database: 

Before running any scan, ensure your database is up-to-date to check against the latest threats. 

→ wpscan --update 

2. Basic Vulnerability Scan: 

This command performs a simple scan, checks the WP version, and attempts to detect known 
vulnerabilities in the core, plugins, and themes. 

wpscan --url http://TARGET_WP_SITE/DOMAIN 

3. Enumerating Users (-e u): 

This is a a critical step for attackers as usernames are often the first part of a login credential 
needed for brute forcing. 

→ wpscan --url http://TARGET_WP_SITE/DOMAIN --enumerate u 

4. Enumerating Vulnerable Plugins (-e vp): 

This command specifically looks for plugins that have known, documented vulnerabilities. 

wpscan --url http://TARGET_WP_SITE/DOMAIN --enumerate vp 

5. Full Aggressive Scan (Optional): 

Use this to combine enumeration of usernames, plugins, and themes for a comprehensive report: 

wpscan --url http://TARGET_WP_SITE/DOMAIN --enumerate u,vp,t 

Result: 

The tool WPScan was studied, analyzed and familiarized. 

 

 



Nikto AIM: To understand and utilize Nikto to perform a basic web server scan, identify common 
server misconfigurations, and locate dangerous files or outdated software on a target web service. 

DESCRIPTION:Nikto is a widely used, highly efficient, and flexible web server scanner that aids 
cybersecurity professionals, system administrators, and penetration testers in identifying and 
addressing potential security risks within web servers. Developed by Chris Sullo, this open-source 
tool is designed to uncover various security issues, such as outdated software, configuration errors, 
and potential vulnerabilities within web servers and web applications. 

Procedure: 

1. Basic Web Server Scan: 

The most common command runs a default, comprehensive test against the target on standard HTTP 
port 80. 

→ nikto -h http://TARGET_IP_OR_DOMAIN 

eg: nikto -h http://kobu.co 

2. Scanning a Specific Port: 

If the web service is running on a non-standard port (eg: 8080), you must specify it using the -p flag. 

→ nikto -h http://TARGET_IP_OR_DOMAIN -p 8080 

eg: nikto -h http://kobu.co -p 8080 

3. Scanning HTTPS (SSL/TLS) Enabled Sites: 

Use the -ssl flag to force Nikto to scan over HTTPS instead of HTTP. 

→ nikto -h https://TARGET_IP_OR_DOMAIN -ssl 

eg: nikto -h https://kobu.co -ssl 

4. Scanning a Specific Directory (CGI Directory Scan): 

This command scans for CGI vulnerabilities in specified directories. 

→ nikto -h http://TARGET_IP_OR_DOMAIN -Cgidirs 

eg: nikto -h http://kobu.co -Cgidirs 

5. Saving the Output to a File: 

It's helpful to save the scan results for later analysis using the -o (output) flag. 

→ nikto -h http://TARGET_IP_OR_DOMAIN -o FILENAME 

eg: nikto -h http://kobu.co -o out.txt 

 

 

 

 



 

 

John The Ripper AIM: To practice extracting password hashes and using John the Ripper (JTR) to 
crack them using both the built-in single mode and external Dictionary attack mode. 

 DESCRIPTION: John the Ripper is an open-source password security auditing and recovery tool. John 
the Ripper begins by reading password hashes from an input file. The tool's detection engine 
automatically identifies the hash format, though you can also specify the format manually. Based on 
your selected attack mode—such as a wordlist or incremental brute-force— the core engine 
generates password candidates. Each candidate is then hashed and compared against the target 
hashes. A successful match is logged, and the process continues until all candidates are checked. 

Procedure: 

1. Run Default Cracking Modes: 

This is the simplest command. JTR automatically identifies the hash type and runs its default 
combination of single, wordlist, and incremental modes. 

→ john hashfile.txt 

2. Dictionary Attack (Wordlist Mode): 

This is the most effective attack for weak passwords. It requires specifying a path to a wordlist. 

→ john --wordlist=/usr/share/wordlists/rockyou.txt hashfile.txt 

3. Specify Hash Format: 

If JTR can't automatically detect the hash type, you may need to specify the format (eg: NTLM or 
Raw-MD5). 

→ john --wordlist=/usr/share/wordlists/rockyou.txt hashfile.txt --format=Raw-MD5 

4. Resuming an Interrupted Session: 

If you stop the cracking process (eg: pressing Ctrl+C), you can resume it later. 

→ john --restore